David Schaich (he): All right, we'll get going now, so that there will still be plenty of
David Schaich (he): sun left when we wrap up.  There are some in the room, some online, and some I'm sure enjoying the first warm, sunny day
David Schaich (he): that I can recall.
David Schaich (he): So, we have the afternoon of Tuesday, the 18th of April.
David Schaich (he): I'm just barely able to see what I am writing on the
David Schaich (he): screen, even with the
David Schaich (he): blinds closed.  But I can write down the six-digit code for today: 4, 3, 4, 9, 1, 1.
David Schaich (he): And the plan for today is just to pick up where we left off
David Schaich (he): yesterday: Wrap up the photon gas and go through a similar sort of exercise for fermions, looking at different limits of behaviour of ideal quantum gases.
David Schaich (he): So, as a reminder, for
David Schaich (he): a photon gas based on
David Schaich (he): the grand-canonical ensemble allowing the particle number and energy
David Schaich (he): to vary with fixed temperature and chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): Trying that to in quantum
David Schaich (he): goes on science, statistics.
David Schaich (he): those phones in which 4 times are
David Schaich (he): we certainly, from the read it through the potential you can derive it. Companies of interest. First of all
David Schaich (he): the average energy density for the protons per UN
David Schaich (he): that we wrote. Yes. I need to move over you so called spectral function. That is equally well. A function of angular frequency. Omega.
David Schaich (he): you wanna the what you flying for the where this particular spectral function that it's
David Schaich (he): like spectrum you derive. It's 2 forms.
David Schaich (he): It's functions that I the frequency.
David Schaich (he): What a wavelength! In both cases we have
David Schaich (he): some pre-factor with unit conversion factors that
David Schaich (he): the speed of let's see. And then the ratio. In this case of frequency to the exponential actor. the energy divided by the temperature
with you.
David Schaich (he): minus one
David Schaich (he): in terms of wavelength.
We also recall that the
David Schaich (he): wavelength and the angular frequency are related by the speed of the wave, which is the speed of lights for light.
David Schaich (he): So swapping frequency for wavelength in these integrals
David Schaich (he): takes the power of frequency and denominator, and it turns into
David Schaich (he): the nominator, went through the accounting that there are
David Schaich (he): it over 5 h
David Schaich (he): in the usual
David Schaich (he): one over exponential 2 Pi Beta, H. R. C. Over Lambda minus one term. Yeah, we saw that
David Schaich (he): compared to some
David Schaich (he): observational data. the sun, stars, and cosmic microwave. All of that data was
David Schaich (he): very well described by the simple functions
David Schaich (he): that are based on
David Schaich (he): derivations. Assuming that non interacting ideal gas, the photons.
David Schaich (he): So the
David Schaich (he): extent to which this ideal gas provides a good description.
David Schaich (he): that sort of observational video you for both
David Schaich (he): objects with temperatures a 1,000 killed, and you
David Schaich (he): just a couple of how about absolute 0
David Schaich (he): use illustrating
David Schaich (he): power of statistical physics, even with fairly extreme assumptions about the form of interactions. In this case their absence.
David Schaich (he): So call to see if there are questions about where we got up to
David Schaich (he): yesterday.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any. You can
David Schaich (he): charge ahead with this expression for the energy density in terms of
David Schaich (he): with my spectrum. and yes. finish. The conversation might actually carry out
David Schaich (he): this integral
David Schaich (he): for that future, giving me. So i'll put the volume back on
David Schaich (he): the right inside of this expression. It is 20 in that you like spectrum
David Schaich (he): in terms of frequency
David Schaich (he): that has. and
David Schaich (he): very phone.
David Schaich (he): If we change variables to
David Schaich (he): some X's beta h bar omega. So the photon energy divided by temperature
David Schaich (he): you is that
David Schaich (he): over H bar
David Schaich (he): the next. So plugging in
David Schaich (he): this change of variables for the
David Schaich (he): 3 powers of frequency. You have the deal, and you get 4 factors of this ratio of temperature
David Schaich (he): over planks. Constant
David Schaich (he): the ratio X to over the X minus one. Dx wish
David Schaich (he): is a a little bit too complicated for a smaller going through as a derivation here in now.
David Schaich (he): but it is a famous integral that I see this one off the screen.
David Schaich (he): There is that change of variables.
David Schaich (he): the famous integral, because it has a very delicious spell. It turns out to be
David Schaich (he): work through it your own time, the product of
David Schaich (he): the you have a function of 4 to this
David Schaich (he): 3 factorial or 6 Zeta function.
David Schaich (he): also of 4.
David Schaich (he): The remote data function for 4 is 4 powers of pie divided by 90.
So remind me.
David Schaich (he): yeah.
David Schaich (he): end result for the average internal energy.
David Schaich (he): That is kind of the fourth over 2 powers of I square
David Schaich (he): 90 over 6 is 15,
and there are
David Schaich (he): 3 h of H bar and 3 h of C left over.
David Schaich (he): because I see, as a
David Schaich (he): next combination that has dimensions of energy, times length. Those are the units that
David Schaich (he): those factors.
David Schaich (he): and you know, similar to that connection between energy length. We want some lengths on the right hand side we have a volume, and then 4 h
David Schaich (he): of the temperature, and that is a small, compact expression for the average internal energy
David Schaich (he): in terms of so the the
David Schaich (he): the fourth power of the temperature.
David Schaich (he): you know
David Schaich (he): we call that for classical
David Schaich (he): gases
David Schaich (he): that will be first
David Schaich (he): statistical physics.
David Schaich (he): One of the main results we derive is that the
David Schaich (he): it's just 3 half times the number of particles times the temperature.
David Schaich (he): if we want to. It's something of a similar form here for a quantum grand canonical relativistic. I feel gas at both phones.
David Schaich (he): We need to do something about that number of particles which was fixed in the canonical case, but fluctuating it.
David Schaich (he): it's another
David Schaich (he): compute from the Grand Canonical partition function.
David Schaich (he): Now we started off with yesterday after the break. In particular.
David Schaich (he): the expression be right before the break, for the average political number and canonical ensemble
David Schaich (he): was. How are you?
David Schaich (he): The grand canonical potential with respect to the chemical potential, You and you I did yesterday that you 40 foot on Jas
David Schaich (he): is approximately 0. This photons are easy to create and destroy all the kind of bolding, much energy.
David Schaich (he): So after we take
David Schaich (he): that derivative. Of the
David Schaich (he): good for you.
David Schaich (he): functional expression for the particle number, we would be able to set the chemical potential to 0
David Schaich (he): to simplify that expression.
David Schaich (he): So let's go ahead and
David Schaich (he): do that.
David Schaich (he): The screen economical potential you looked at just yesterday.
David Schaich (he): We'll implicitly rewrite it by.
David Schaich (he): I can get into this expression
David Schaich (he): negative sign out for us
David Schaich (he): Google frequencies
David Schaich (he): from 0 to infinity of the frequency squared. And then.
yeah.
David Schaich (he): that depends on the chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): will be affected by the derivative
David Schaich (he): So this is not
quite similar to the derivative that we computed to get the energy that state
David Schaich (he): in the first place, just taking the derivative with respect to the chemical potential mute instead of the inverse temperature data.
David Schaich (he): So what i'm just out of this
David Schaich (he): is the
David Schaich (he): not.
David Schaich (he): And then with the chain rule, let me have You'll get a square from before be happy. negative factor of those exponentials.
David Schaich (he): And then we bring down the derivative of the exponential factor. With respect to the issues
David Schaich (he): itself. Steve
David Schaich (he): Beta is going to cancel out with the
David Schaich (he): University of the temperature. See negative signs also cancel. and let me know
David Schaich (he): the vanishing chemical, potential
David Schaich (he): and simple. I to this usual.
David Schaich (he): and then integral over so dividing E to the minus as he enters you integral
David Schaich (he): E to the Beta h bar Omega, minus one in the denominator, and Omega squared
David Schaich (he): the omega
David Schaich (he): in the numerator, which
David Schaich (he): actually, if we go back to the planning spectrum. you can see that the up to the factor of the that we.
David Schaich (he): this integral differs only by a factor of H. Bar Omega, which is the energy of the photons which
David Schaich (he): make some sense. We want the energy of the photon gas. What we need to do is
David Schaich (he): integrate not only over the number, but over the
David Schaich (he): number of hotels
David Schaich (he): as a function of frequency weighted by the energy that they carry. H. Bar Omega
David Schaich (he): something that
David Schaich (he): we will make use of when
David Schaich (he): you turn to the next. It provides a little trip. Yeah would have allowed us to jump straight from the like spectrum. 2 mis results without
David Schaich (he): of the derivative steps at reproduced. That answer we can justify physically
David Schaich (he): making the same change of variables as we did when evaluating that planning spectrum we're integrating over it.
David Schaich (he): It's an X equal to
David Schaich (he): 2 factors when they go times that, do you, Omega?
David Schaich (he): We'll combine it to give us to you over H. Calling now to the third rather than forward power
David Schaich (he): integral now x squared
David Schaich (he): i'm. Bringing to the X minus one Gx.
David Schaich (he): Another delicious, integral.
David Schaich (he): quite similar to the one before. And
David Schaich (he): there you so all the elegance results. That's again too much of it
David Schaich (he): paying to
David Schaich (he): computes live in this module.
David Schaich (he): This is
David Schaich (he): so 2 factorial 2,
you know, data function
David Schaich (he): the 3, which is an international number about 1 point.
David Schaich (he): 2 0 2
David Schaich (he): so pretty everything together.
David Schaich (he): Average
David Schaich (he): volume of that gas times. 3 h of the temperature with another
David Schaich (he): of the other 2.
David Schaich (he): Is it a 3
David Schaich (he): high school, really. and then another 3 vectors of Hrc.
David Schaich (he): So now
David Schaich (he): we just barely have the 2 results for energy and particle number fitting up the screen at once.
David Schaich (he): and quite nicely. We can see that their functional form
David Schaich (he): is what we would have expected from our earlier classical, economical, and not an optimistic idea.
You ask computation.
David Schaich (he): The energy is proportional to the
David Schaich (he): the number particle. Is this proportion of boring types of your cube in a different, only bypass single power of temperature. Really. now it is somewhat more
David Schaich (he): complicated.
David Schaich (he): We have. so as
David Schaich (he): in that classical economical case.
David Schaich (he): so the time the S internal energy is proportional to and times T. And the
David Schaich (he): use going to give us a high school over 15.
David Schaich (he): I squared
David Schaich (he): over 2 from the number density.
David Schaich (he): and if we
David Schaich (he): you cancel in terms. and remember where
David Schaich (he): numbers like 6 and 2 are coming from the You have a functions okay and factorial. you can. But this, suggested we as
David Schaich (he): 6.
David Schaich (he): Why, that to
David Schaich (he): Zeta 3, so that 6, over 9 is one over 15.
David Schaich (he): What factors of pie? And this is just the how many of you. You know the functions that we set it off, with
David Schaich (he): which we were to put all that in about 2.7
David Schaich (he): in decimal terms. So not quite twice as large as the rehabs
David Schaich (he): 4
David Schaich (he): a classical, non-relativistic ideal gas and the economic ensemble, still the same
David Schaich (he): order of magnitude. and they
David Schaich (he): some combination of really fundamental physical functions, that function.
David Schaich (he): So any questions about this result before we go ahead to
David Schaich (he): complete the derivation of the equation of States
David Schaich (he): for the photon gas
David Schaich (he): again if we pick back to That's
David Schaich (he): classical ideal gas. We did
David Schaich (he): several weeks ago. The equation of state. There is the ideal des off pressure times for you is
David Schaich (he): particle number times temperature. So we we'll want to try to
David Schaich (he): produce something similar in particular relating this
David Schaich (he): actor of average particle number of times temperature 2 pressure, and told you
David Schaich (he): up to guess which. Of course, the missing piece we don't have yet is
David Schaich (he): the pressure of the proton. Yes. which
David Schaich (he): is call fancy terms the the radiation pressure
David Schaich (he): small enough for that to It's something we don't know this day a day, but. like shining on a surface.
David Schaich (he): will actually produce the pressure on that service, exerting the force, pushing it away.
David Schaich (he): which. on our usual definition of pressure and statistical physics, is given by
David Schaich (he): the response. The internal energy.
David Schaich (he): 2 way changes the volume. the negative signs, and it's more volume secured. What your energies. subject to the screens that the entropy on the
David Schaich (he): so before evaluating it. This derivative
David Schaich (he): of the energy that we have just computed a few months ago.
David Schaich (he): I need to make sure that we. the
which is.
David Schaich (he): yeah, one more
David Schaich (he): derive quality that
David Schaich (he): Yeah, I would
you.
David Schaich (he): It's very usual malaysia
David Schaich (he): that we derive when the
David Schaich (he): the entropy is the difference between the internal energy.
That's great potential
David Schaich (he): the temperature.
David Schaich (he): Before we computed the internal energy.
David Schaich (he): it's easy enough to divide it that result by a factor of temperature missing piece. Here
David Schaich (he): is the great economical potential
David Schaich (he): divided by the temperature which we have in terms
David Schaich (he): of the integral over frequencies. the usual omega square, the what is derivative we just took
David Schaich (he): or minus E to the Beta H. Bar Omega and Chemical potential.
David Schaich (he): 2 0
David Schaich (he): and making the familiar change of variables. X equals data. H. Bar Omega. you pick up 3 factors of
David Schaich (he): you over H bar.
David Schaich (he): and then the Pi square. which for a few C here
David Schaich (he): integral now for x.
David Schaich (he): that's fit on the screen, and it's the same story with this particular integral. It is closely related to
David Schaich (he): the ones we deal with before which just came from derivatives of this integrand. so it's not too surprising that it has a
David Schaich (he): similar.
David Schaich (he): You know it's very similar results that we yeah
David Schaich (he): look at all 4 States rather than
through
David Schaich (he): now as a negative sign of maybe 2 times 0 over 4.
David Schaich (he): I'm sure with the call. See that
David Schaich (he): 5. What's over
David Schaich (he): 25,
David Schaich (he): So the
David Schaich (he): Yes.
a common factor of
David Schaich (he): me to you.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. How's it? From the energy high squared over
David Schaich (he): 15,
David Schaich (he): you can actually note that the
David Schaich (he): I have there.
David Schaich (he): I'll give another a factor of the Pi squared over H. Bar, Q, C. Q. So that's common factor to both terms.
David Schaich (he): and the difference. We just have a
David Schaich (he): one over 15 from the energy, and then minus negative one over 45.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): plus one over 45,
David Schaich (he): second term there. so that's 3 46, plus 150.
David Schaich (he): What like this?
David Schaich (he): Which is a fun factor from combinations of you know, Zeta functions, but
David Schaich (he): not what we need to worry about too much.
David Schaich (he): What matters is the condition of the
David Schaich (he): that
the functional form.
David Schaich (he): the combination of has to be fixed to a constant i'm. Taking the derivative to compute radiation pressure.
David Schaich (he): So this go ahead and do that
David Schaich (he): once you plug in the what time you guys energy.
David Schaich (he): which has negative sign
David Schaich (he): we just described. I square over 15.
David Schaich (he): Let me take the
David Schaich (he): with our temperature.
That
David Schaich (he): temperature equals some constant times
David Schaich (he): into the minus one to the power
David Schaich (he): which enforces the condition of the Council of entropy. That's 18 queued.
David Schaich (he): Is that cost to be.
David Schaich (he): Then the volume Times
David Schaich (he): to the fourth gives us you to the 4 power
David Schaich (he): times. V. To the minus 4 third plus one.
David Schaich (he): It's back to one-third.
David Schaich (he): which
David Schaich (he): brings out a negative sign in the factory of 3
David Schaich (he): no
David Schaich (he): along with a factor of the volume of the derivative
David Schaich (he): negative signs with that. Well. that
David Schaich (he): constant factor.
David Schaich (he): you know.
David Schaich (he): taking the one over V from derivative out there. So we are back to being to the negative one-third power
David Schaich (he): So much as we saw.
Yeah.
David Schaich (he): case of the classical equation of states. We just get yeah internal energy
David Schaich (he): back out. Again.
David Schaich (he): How do you? Same combination of the
sure he was.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, in the first place. So.
David Schaich (he): in other words.
David Schaich (he): radiation pressure on the full time they have small. I buy
David Schaich (he): It's one good
average internal energy.
David Schaich (he): which. if we right one for as 2 over 6,
David Schaich (he): identify it.
David Schaich (he): Another factor of you know, functions to go on with the ratio again, and 0 functions.
David Schaich (he): Yes.
David Schaich (he): we found before 2 number
David Schaich (he): all right. average number of
David Schaich (he): so those terms all cancel out.
David Schaich (he): Can we end up just with that ratio of Zeta functions. Now
David Schaich (he): the 4, this pilot
David Schaich (he): over 90 times the irrational
David Schaich (he): 0 3
David Schaich (he): times the photon number and temperature. So
David Schaich (he): we have the in the end.
David Schaich (he): That's the same
David Schaich (he): functional form. Is the it's proportional to M. To you that possible proportionality. It is just change now
David Schaich (he): from one that in the classical case.
David Schaich (he): to this ratio of the functions you might recall that the Zeta function approaches one.
David Schaich (he): Yes, it's argument increases
David Schaich (he): positive real access.
David Schaich (he): Say the 4. Is there 1 point, one
David Schaich (he): data, 3, as I said before, is that 1.2 or 2, so their ratio is
David Schaich (he): approximately 4.9 to a few significant figure. It's rather than one. So
David Schaich (he): difference compared to the
David Schaich (he): I have to go. I It's just absolutely.
David Schaich (he): We're 10% variation.
David Schaich (he): You know
David Schaich (he): the cost of proportionality between pressure times
one side compared to
David Schaich (he): average.
David Schaich (he): So that is in principle something that we created go through the same source of exercises with thermodynamic cycles and see how does it behave with the I guess the photons.
David Schaich (he): yes. even more of thought experience something we would do in practice. So I think we can be content just to declared victory here that the
David Schaich (he): conclusion that the ultimate relativistic
David Schaich (he): autumn gas or photons is
David Schaich (he): behavior the same as
David Schaich (he): the classical. and we can turn our attention now to something that will have a few more significant differences. You get photons.
David Schaich (he): so i'll just check to see if there are
David Schaich (he): questions or objections to a result cell phone or switching gears and going back to the starting point.
David Schaich (he): not seeing any. We'll charge your head. We are definitely not going to finish talking about
David Schaich (he): knowledge reactive
David Schaich (he): today.
David Schaich (he): We can at least you can start in and take care of the
David Schaich (he): 11 areas as a reminder. Well fermions the occupation numbers for the energy levels that we sell over
the quantum statistical approach are limited
David Schaich (he): to
David Schaich (he): the energy level being either unoccupied in occupation over a 0.
David Schaich (he): We're simply occupied an occupation of one. Everything else is for all the exclusion principle.
It was.
David Schaich (he): We economic potential for
David Schaich (he): the negative temperature.
David Schaich (he): I'm. The of the she's right. You saw yesterday. It was a product over energy levels that logarithm towards the product
David Schaich (he): to a
David Schaich (he): one plus the exponential factor
David Schaich (he): inverse temperature.
the energy
David Schaich (he): at the
David Schaich (he): and that chemical attention which is no longer
David Schaich (he): what to be
David Schaich (he): vanishing in general.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. you can know that the main difference we have here compared to the
David Schaich (he): yes, my economical potential.
David Schaich (he): I just negative signs with the overall negative sign up front
David Schaich (he): and the relative negative sign in that logarithm we have
David Schaich (he): some fairly extreme effects
David Schaich (he): to.
David Schaich (he): Would you see overlap with the photon gas? We just consider, unless return to non-volatistic
David Schaich (he): energies. So
David Schaich (he): is P. Squared over 2 M. The P. Squared is quantized
David Schaich (he): a call queue
David Schaich (he): that brings in like usual
David Schaich (he): factors of each bar square. That minus pi squared over 2 ml squared 50, you know. Call that
David Schaich (he): of the integer.
David Schaich (he): Well, then, some vector so. and just right. What was that?
David Schaich (he): It is
David Schaich (he): a squared in the inner product of that 3, vector where all of these.
David Schaich (he): all the components.
David Schaich (he): what this discreet he did, your momentum are strictly positive integers.
David Schaich (he): So this
David Schaich (he): into the economical potential.
David Schaich (he): A fresh page
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): 3 vectors. K:
David Schaich (he): I see. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): one plus
David Schaich (he): the exponential.
And this
David Schaich (he): nice council squared, Pi squared
David Schaich (he): 2 Ml. Squared times the temperature. whatever temperature is data. And then there is Yes. we issue a chemical potential to I for sure.
David Schaich (he): all inside
David Schaich (he): and it
David Schaich (he): I've looked over the gap here because the real that fermions like electrons in
David Schaich (he): video
David Schaich (he): have an additional factor of 2 double the you ever see.
David Schaich (he): For all of the energy laws. We also had a factor of 2 to the photon gas where it was coming from the 2 polarizations
David Schaich (he): something that you can look at, and it's just horrible. On Thursday, if there is demand.
David Schaich (he): in fact, to here is coming from a different source. It's difficult for me on this in everyday materials
that phones.
David Schaich (he): Okay.
David Schaich (he): hey?
David Schaich (he): Yes. Here.
David Schaich (he): right
David Schaich (he): with the location marks, because these are not actually spinning
David Schaich (he): just has a
David Schaich (he): In some ways they behave as though they were.
David Schaich (he): It's a, and it's sort of the serious as usual for this module you don't need to have seen before.
David Schaich (he): Give me a calls it back to the 2. Yeah, we will carry through
David Schaich (he): the following calculations. But no, every momentum 3 vector is going to have that additional two-fold degeneracy in addition to degeneracy is coming from, say.
David Schaich (he): from we're hitting around pretty much of the space so exactly the same in this respect
David Schaich (he): as the great economic potential. What are you? Yes.
David Schaich (he): Another similar area that we can do.
David Schaich (he): One of the simplifications
David Schaich (he): that we have 5 in the
David Schaich (he): Okay. Assume that the what we're dealing with is large compared to
David Schaich (he): the characteristic scale. For the particles in question. So this some 3 vectors
David Schaich (he): and just become an integral over
David Schaich (he): continuous.
David Schaich (he): maybe holes
David Schaich (he): up here there. K. Squared.
David Schaich (he): Stay out of it
David Schaich (he): after, because the argument of the world has only all that scalar inner product. K. Squared. we will benefit again from working in.
David Schaich (he): So with this
David Schaich (he): simplification.
David Schaich (he): the positive moment to restrict the integral to just one octave of
David Schaich (he): three-dimensional space. That you'll be
David Schaich (he): is 4 pi the total solid angle
David Schaich (he): by 8, which is pi over 2 and 2
David Schaich (he): answers that 2 upfronts. So we get
David Schaich (he): minus pi team
David Schaich (he): look similar to the the potential for the proton gas.
David Schaich (he): A hat squared times that log really
David Schaich (he): of the same exponential factor. Right?
David Schaich (he): You had it all
David Schaich (he): integrating now over the K hat. the magnitude 3. Vector
David Schaich (he): So this is where similarities with the photon gas
David Schaich (he): start to cease just because we have how much different dependence
David Schaich (he): all that that will mention. Kate
David Schaich (he): got it in this integrand. He said that even the minus Beta h bar omega.
David Schaich (he): we have e to the minus beta times. It's not optimistic over the
David Schaich (he): and the easiest way to deal with that is actually to
David Schaich (he): recognize that it is the energy.
and she period was
David Schaich (he): to work in terms of the energy itself rather than these.
David Schaich (he): So the energy
David Schaich (he): is this factor here, apart from the K hat squared over 2 Ml. Squared. We you.
David Schaich (he): We arrange that to get the
David Schaich (he): we will have.
David Schaich (he): How over?
David Schaich (he): Hi, h bar.
David Schaich (he): I'm taking the square root of all those factors.
David Schaich (he): and i'll give you a square root of 2, and with the energy itself
David Schaich (he): the differential factor. It corresponds to this variable.
David Schaich (he): then
David Schaich (he): the derivative of the square root of the energy. It's in a one-half the partial
David Schaich (he): how the energy goes down.
the one I have.
David Schaich (he): and then
David Schaich (he): on top. So. putting all of this in.
David Schaich (he): we have
David Schaich (he): minus high times. T we have
David Schaich (he): 3 h of.
David Schaich (he): for the K squared Dk
David Schaich (he): Limits of integration are still the same as K. Goes to infinity. The energy
David Schaich (he): Okay, square. You didn't have that
David Schaich (he): £2 of the square root left. So actually, 2
David Schaich (he): times the logarithm of one plus.
David Schaich (he): So that simplification is the reason we changed these variables in the first place.
David Schaich (he): and then from the Dk apps we have
over
David Schaich (he): that square root of 2 E.
David Schaich (he): So the 3 powers of L. You can recognize as the usual volume. We still have the power of team that pie cancels out with one of the 3
David Schaich (he): factories that we have the denominator. So it's pi squared each part you. and then
David Schaich (he): we have a factor of 2 over 2,
David Schaich (he): 3 h of
David Schaich (he): is the square root of that mass cube.
David Schaich (he): and then integral itself.
David Schaich (he): the usual.
David Schaich (he): the yeah.
David Schaich (he): And again.
David Schaich (he): compared to the grand canonical potential for the photon gas.
David Schaich (he): The main difference here is in terms of the signs, the overall negative sign out from. And do you
David Schaich (he): the constant one
David Schaich (he): exponential factor
David Schaich (he): there is. So this is a
David Schaich (he): so. What
David Schaich (he): offered integral to deal with
David Schaich (he): it
David Schaich (he): is sometimes just known as a fairly direct integrals as it arises in.
David Schaich (he): and there's a whole machinery. This is our call expansion that
David Schaich (he): exists to simplify and evaluate this
David Schaich (he): on without relying on any modern technology. What we will do, not in the remaining 2 min. but on Monday
David Schaich (he): what has to be
David Schaich (he): next? Simplification What comes from
David Schaich (he): considering the behavior? I'll disintegrate
David Schaich (he): half the temperatures
David Schaich (he): very far from the classical limits of high temperatures, where. with the
David Schaich (he): both on for me, on and classical statistics, all converge to the same behavior. So, in addition to simplifying the calculation.
David Schaich (he): this low temperature regime is an interesting one to sort of maximize the importance
David Schaich (he): of quantum effects. Yeah. this for me, I guess.
People see him
David Schaich (he): on Monday.
David Schaich (he): How that leads to a simplification
David Schaich (he): of our results so far? What do you, grand canonical potential for that for me on gas?
David Schaich (he): It's not going to be the obvious thing to see. So we won't Get into it today. I will wrap up there just with a
David Schaich (he): I'll call 4 am questions or concerns about
David Schaich (he): what we've done so far this week with these ideal calls and gases.
David Schaich (he): Not seeing any. I'll let you go. Enjoy the sunshine and see you again. Thursday morning.
David Schaich (he): I'll go into
David Schaich (he): fancy models of sell this kind of reproduce
David Schaich (he): some additional experimental data now coming from smaller scale.
David Schaich (he): some stories, and in your cellar space.